---
date: "31st May 2022"
title: "Thoughts on a browser's 'back' button"
description: "A few days ago, @adamwathan ran a poll asking whether people felt that the browser's 'back' button should return the previous page exactly as it was when the person viewed it, or whether its content should be refreshed so that it was up to date."
image:
  src: "/assets/images/1.thoughts-on-a-browsers-back-button.jpg"

head:
  meta:
    - property: "og:title"
      content: "Thoughts on a browser's 'back' button"
    - property: "og:description"
      content: "A few days ago, @adamwathan ran a poll asking whether people felt that the browser's 'back' button should return the previous page exactly as it was when the person viewed it, or whether its content should be refreshed so that it was up to date."
---

# Thoughts on a browser's 'back' button
<span class="meta">31st May 2022</span>

A few days ago, @adamwathan ran a poll asking whether people felt that the browser's 'back' button should return the previous page exactly as it was when the person viewed it, or whether its content should be refreshed so that it was up to date.

I felt it should be the later, however I was clearly in the minority. This got me thinking as to whether my expectations were wrong. So, I figured I'd explore why I believe the 'back' button should not use a cached version of the page.

---

### Overview

After ruminating on the subject for a bit, I came to the conclusion that this subject consists of four key areas:

1. History
2. Audience
3. Complexity
4. Expectations

Let's explore each of them, and why I feel that, when combined, the 'back' button should be used to refresh the page content.

> I'm not trying to change any minds (or start a flame war here), however since this seems to be the minority opinion, I believe it deserves some discussion. I am also aware that there are certain benefits to cached pages e.g. preserving form content, but I feel they are outweighed by the cons.

---

### History

Back in the days of the early web, almost everything was static and simple (no JavaScript). It also didn't change with anywhere near the frequency that content does today. As such, browser-based page caching was a very simple thing to implement (and it made a lot of sense).

When you clicked 'back', the browser would just return the exact same HTML and it would all work fine since it wasn't doing anything complex e.g. state-related. As developers, many of us grew up understanding that this is how the browser works when you click 'back' and that philosophy is now engrained in our mindset.

However, imagine that web 1.0 never existed. Imagine that the web launched with all the fancy bells and whistles we have today. Would you still expect the 'back' button to behave exactly the same?

---

### Audience

This second point rolls on from the first. As developers, we know the ins and outs of what the browser actually does when we click 'back' (fetching from cache and so on).

However, if you asked a non-tech-savvy person what the 'back' button does, I'm fairly confident they would tell you that it goes to the previous web address or page. They wouldn't know that it loads a cached page (or why). They would most likely think that the browser loads it all from scratch again.

While we understand this isn't the case (and might find value in loading a cached page), for everyone else, it is likely to be confusing. This is particularly true if they've done something which would alter the content of the previous page when refreshed (see expectations below).

---

### Complexity

I think it is fair to say that we don't really build web sites anymore. We build web applications. These apps have become more and more complex as the years go by. We've got SPAs, state management, events & listeners, history / popstate and polling (to name just a few).

It's hard enough when we've written the code entirely ourselves, but we're often using frameworks and libraries, each of which are trying to manage (and preserve) state. In addition, it is often impractical (or sometimes even not possible) to make code changes to these dependencies.

When you combine these dependencies and complexity, it is inevitable that something will break at some point. If you're lucky, you'll still get a usable page, but sometimes it will break before anything gets rendered and the user will just get a blank page.

If you dispense with the cache, and instead load from scratch, you'll lessen the risk of this happening, though admittedly this has drawbacks (e.g. server load).

---

### Expectations

This last point is a little bit more lower-level, which is nice in that it gets the point across in a more practical and less theoretical context:

- Consider you have an 'index' page for your blog.
- You click on a link on this page to take you to the 'edit' page for a particular blog post.
- You then update its title and set it to published.
- You then press the 'save' button.
- You then hit 'back' to go to the index page.

Using classic behaviour, the browser shows you the blog post's old title and published status. As a developer, we know why this has happened. However, a non-tech-savvy user sees this and may think that the changes haven't been saved. Worse, they then click edit and see the revised changes.

At best, it's confusing, but at worst, it can cause real stress e.g. if the user is doing something that involves a financial transaction.

---

### Wrapping up

Put all this together and (to me, at least), it becomes clear that expecting classic 'back' button behaviour within modern, interactive, state-heavy web apps is not realistic (even more so if they are regularly receiving new content e.g. a social media platform).

Even if we understand the legacy that explains the classic behaviour, is it really justifable to continue to push that legacy to a modern environment (SPAs etc.) as well as to a modern audience that has a different set of expectations?

Thanks for reading!