---
date: "11th January 2022"
title: "Articles - Using Twitter Snowflake IDs for your database primary keys in Laravel"
description: "Yesterday, I published an article where I compared UUIDs, ULIDs and Twitter Snowflakes for use as your database primary key. I ended up selecting Snowflakes because it has some significant benefits."
image:
  src: "/assets/images/3.using-twitter-snowflake-ids-for-your-database-primary-keys-in-laravel.jpg"

head:
  meta:
    - property: "og:title"
      content: "Using Twitter Snowflake IDs for your database primary keys in Laravel"
    - property: "og:description"
      content: "Yesterday, I published an article where I compared UUIDs, ULIDs and Twitter Snowflakes for use as your database primary key. I ended up selecting Snowflakes because it has some significant benefits."
---

# How to use Twitter Snowflake IDs for your database primary keys in Laravel
<span class="meta">11th January 2022</span>

Yesterday, I published an article where I compared UUIDs, ULIDs and Twitter Snowflakes for use as your database primary key. I ended up selecting Twitter Snowflakes because it has some significant benefits:

1. It consists entirely of integers.
2. It uses less space (16 characters, so it fits in a `BIGINT`).
3. Indexing of integers is much faster than indexing a string.
4. Keys begin with a timestamp, so are sortable.
5. Keys end with a random number, so guessing table size is not possible.
6. Queries that JOIN on the keys will be faster.
7. Databases handle integers more efficiently than strings.
8. Generation of new keys is faster (less than 1 ms).

In this article, I want to document how you can get set up with Snowflakes in your Laravel application. Fortunately, it’s pretty easy.

> **Update**: I've released a package to do what you'll find below.

---

### Install Snowflake

Snowflake was designed by Twitter, and the original implementation was written in Scala. Fortunately, a PHP implementation also exists courtesy of Chinese developer, Godruoyi. We’ll begin by pulling it in with Composer:

```shell
composer require godruoyi/php-snowflake
```

---

### How Snowflake works

Owing to how Snowflake was designed, or rather what it was designed to do, you need to set up a few things when first pulling it in. Snowflake is designed to work in a clustered environment where multiple data centres and workers exist and can be used to generate keys. The idea being that you can distribute key generation to reduce load and further reduce the risk of collision.

The PHP implementation allows for this and includes support for up to 31 data centres, and 31 worker nodes within each centre. Since many developers that use the package are unlikely to need this level of distribution, the default approach is to leave these values blank, in which case the package will just select a random number between 1 and 31 for each value.

> Important: This random selection happens each time Laravel is booted. In most cases, it won’t cause any issues. However, it is a good practice to be explicit about which data centre and worker node number should be used. Being explicit allows us to set up a distributed architecture later if we need to do so.

---

### Configuring Snowflake

Let’s begin by creating a new configuration file that Snowflake will read from in order to get the number it should use for the data centre and worker node. You can call it whatever you want, but I’ll opt for snowflake.php

```php
return [
    'data_center' => env('SNOWFLAKE_DATA_CENTER', 1),
    'worker_node' => env('SNOWFLAKE_WORKER', 1),
];
```

This config file attempts to use values supplied in our environment file. If they don’t exist, it uses a default of 1 for the data centre and 1 for the worker node.

Next, we need to initialize Snowflake whenever Laravel boots up. We’ll then store the Snowflake instance in the service container as a `singleton`. Doing this ensures that Laravel doesn’t have to create more than one version of the Snowflake object every time we want to create a new key.

All of this happens within a service provider. I’ll use the `AppServiceProvider` for this article, but feel free to create a new one and register it if you prefer.

```php
namespace App\Providers;

use Godruoyi\Snowflake\Snowflake;
use Illuminate\Support\ServiceProvider;
use Godruoyi\Snowflake\RandomSequenceResolver;

class AppServiceProvider extends ServiceProvider
{
    public function register() : void
    {
        $this->app->singleton('snowflake', function() {
            return (new Snowflake(
                config('snowflake.data_center'),
                config('snowflake.worker_node'))
            )
            ->setStartTimeStamp(strtotime('2022-01-01') * 1000)
            ->setSequenceResolver(new RandomSequenceResolver());
        });
    }
}
```

Notice that we are calling the `setStartTimeStamp` method. This is important as there are limits to how many Snowflake keys can be generated based on the provided timestamp. When setting up new projects, make sure that you set the date to the current date (and then don’t change it).

The package includes several options for determining how the key sequence is created. You can use any that you wish (including a bespoke Laravel version that exists), however the benefit of using `RandomSequenceResolver` is that it has no dependencies e.g. Redis.

---

### Updating your migrations

Since your migrations most likely use integers for your primary keys, there isn’t much to do here. We simply need to instruct Laravel to use unsigned big integers and not to use auto-incrementation.

```php
// Before
$table->id();

// After
$table->unsignedBigInteger('id')->primary();
```

Here’s an example:

```php
class CreateUsersTable extends Migration
{
    public function up()
    {
        Schema::create('users', function(Blueprint $table) {
            $table->unsignedBigInteger('id')->primary();
            $table->string('name', 100);
            $table->timestamps();
        });
    }
}
```

---

### Using Snowflake
We can easily generate a Snowflake ID by resolving the singleton out of the service container and then calling its ID method:

```php
resolve('snowflake')->id();
```

However, we don’t want to generate keys manually. Instead, we want Laravel to automatically set them when we’re creating new models. We’ll also need to tell Laravel to not use auto-incrementation for the primary key.

The easiest way to solve both of these problems, is to create a simple `trait` that we can then use within any relevant model:

```php
namespace App\Traits;

trait Snowflake
{
    protected static function boot()
    {
        parent::boot();

        static::creating(function($model) {
            if (! $model->getKey()) {
               $key = resolve('snowflake')->id();
               $model->{$model->getKeyName()} = $key;
            }
        });
    }

    public function getIncrementing()
    {
        return false;
    }
}
```

All we need to do now, is use the trait within our models:

```php
namespace App\Models;

class User extends Model
{
    use Snowflake;
}
```
And that’s all there is to it!

---

### Wrapping Up

I hope you enjoyed this article and that you found something interesting in it. If you’d like to see more from me, then you can follow me on Twitter.